- [S01 course welcome and logistics](#s01-course-welcome-and-logistics)
  - [Welcome](#welcome)
  - [Course scope](#course-scope)
  - [How we work](#how-we-work)
    - [Know your laptop](#know-your-laptop)
  - [Logistics](#logistics)
    - [Discord](#discord)
    - [Github](#github)
    - [chatGPT](#chatgpt)
  - [Evaluation](#evaluation)
  - [Today](#today)


# S01 course welcome and logistics

## Welcome

I'm Alexis and I'm super excited to work with you on these fantastic databases that are MongoDB and Neo4j.

- Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/alexisperrier/
- Bluesky: @alexisperrier.bsky.social
- Mastodon: https://sigmoid.social/@alexisperrier

If you've only worked with SQL database such as PostgreSQL, you will be amazed.

## Course scope

This is a course on MongoDB and Neo4j.

- MongoDB is a NoSQL database that shines for large volume databases and handling flexible data structures.
- Neo4J is a graph database that is particularly efficient for certain types of use cases and questions - knowledge graphs.

The database landscape is evolving as AI blooms. Vector search is the building block of LLMs.
All the major players now offer vector search, including PostgreSQL, MongoDB and Neo4J. Vector databases have also come into light (they've been around for some time) with platforms such as Weaviate.
So we must dedicate one session to play with vector search.

We have 6 sessions together, 3h hours each. Not a lot of time to cover such big topics / tools.

The course plan is:

- 2 sessions on MongoDB
- 1 session on vector search
- 3 sessions on Neo4j

## How we work

This course is as much as possible hands-on with a "learning by doing" approach.

Since this is an advanced course and we don't have much time we will not focus on the query language specific to these platforms. Although we will have our share of querying. But you can all learn a new querying language pretty fast.
We will focus on the **why** on top of the **how**.

Each session consists of 50% (or more) you working on a lab or project and 50% (or less) of me talking.

### Know your laptop

I assume you have a solid base in python or some other similar language, and SQL database.

I also expect you to find your way around your laptop.

For instance you can spin up a terminal and modify the PATH.

If python is not your thing and you prefer another language to work with (go, javascript, PHP, tcl/tk, Java, ...) please do so. This is a course on databases not on scripting languages. But all the scripted examples will be based on python 3.12 and `pymongo`.

## Logistics

### Discord

We have a discord channel dedicated to the course.

<https://discord.gg/Tvf5YECHTq>

Hop in, say hello.

You can contact me directly on the discord channel anytime for questions.

### Github

And the course is on Github.

You can find all the course documentation in the /docs folder

### chatGPT

The use of ChatGPT and other LLMs is allowed.

It would be absurd to not use these amazing tools

But it's important to understand how to use them when learning something.

Working with an LLM can be tricky, frustrating and a waste of time.  We will experiment together how to make the most of *"AI"*.

But the main principle is that you don't get fit by watching people workout at the gym.

You can't learn by letting the LLM do the work.

## Evaluation

If you come and try your best to get the work done, you do not have to worry about the grade.

Evaluation will be throughout the course with

- lab work / worksheets
- A final quiz that covers the course. no tricks.

But please come and be on time.

## Today

We start with a global high overview of databases and then dive into MongoDB.

But first let's do the `getting to know you` form

[TODO] link to form on quiz.skatai.com
