# S02.03 MongoDB deep dive

Retrieving data through querying is one important aspect of working with a database.

However if you already know SQL, it's straightforward to give the database schema as background context to an LLM (chatGPT, Claude, ...) and convert the query from SQL to MongoDB.
In fact, LLMs are getting better and better at generating queries that answer a given question in natural language.

More importantly is understanding what makes MongoDB shine ?

- use cases
- schema design
- specific features
- optimization

The goal is that you have a good understanding of

1. when to use SQL or NoSQL
2. how to design a NoSQL database
3. how to optimize a NoSQL database

## SQL vs NoSQL

- use cases see medium article
- performance see other ,medium article

I would say that this is the first question at the early stage of your application design.

You've outgrown a simple sqlite or JSON based data store. what should you aim for next ?

An excellent article on when to use NoSQL

https://medium.com/@sqlinsix/when-to-use-sql-or-nosql-b50d4a52c157

questions to ask

- is the data structure / schema expected to change often
- is the application read or write intense

- How often will I be reading and writing the data?
- How often will the structure of the data change?
- How much of the data is unknown — meaning that more can be added later that I may be unaware of?
  - compare financial transactions (we know all types) and workouts (come in all shapes and sizes) or food
- What does the final product look like?


NoSQL is most appropriately used for document data

- journal that vary in content, length etc
- configuration files where keys may be present or not. not consistent anyway

SQL is most efficient

- for transactional systems
- data schema does not change often
- high writes

NoSQL :

- document data
- high reads
- flexible data structure

Let's compare data organization:

### SQL

In a SQL database, we have a table within a database that has columns and rows of data.
A table has a unique key called the **primary key**.
A normalized database (a piece of data exists only in one table) uses foreign keys to reference (link) tables together.

hierarchy:

- A foreign key column links a column in one table to another table
- A row of data is the entity or the data value
- A column is an attribute or property of the entity
- A table holds all the entities that are grouped together in a fixed structure of columns
- Tables exist within a database

In NoSQL

we have a collection that has documents.
Each collection has a unique key  (the _id field)
Within a document, you may have subdocuments and these subdocuments are data related to the document itself (for an example, a list of addresses that a person has).

hierarchy:

- A document is the entity or data value
- A subdocument is a child document **within** a parent document. **embedded**
- A field is an attribute or property of the document
- A collection holds all the document that are grouped together in a semi-fixed structure of columns
- Collections exist within a database

### Workouts

- weights and reps
- jump rope
- running, rowing, ...

The join complexity would be enormous relative to a person’s workout, as there may be 5–10 (or even more) combinations. In addition, workouts such as drop sets where the weight is constantly changing and a maximum (or minimum) repetition range must be met would be extremely challenging to track with a set schema using SQL.


NoSQL from the start, we think about the data entity itself — for an example, we think about the entire workout of day 2017-01-01 as a whole.

We don’t need joins to return all the related data from a normalized data process because we store by the entire entity.

another good example would be a piece of music

vocals, genre, duration, beat, artists, musicians, instruments, software, etc etc etc

What other type of datasets can you think of ?


### OLTP

In OLTP systems, we optimize for writes as much as possible

Online transaction processing (OLTP) is a type of database system used in transaction-oriented applications, such as many operational systems

### what about a mailing address ?

what about an example where we store a customer’s mailing address?
terrible idea in a SQL database because the normalization approach to this lacks an understanding of business necessity.
Very few people are updating their address on a daily basis, so optimizing for writes makes little sense.
An address is going to be read more than written. NoSQL is a much better way to store addresses and address history because (1) we’ll be reading it much more than writing a new address and (2) NoSQL makes it easy to store historical addresses in a subdocument.


Fitness data will also be read at a much higher rate than ever written.

### Comparison PostgreSQL vs MongoDB

https://medium.com/@vosarat1995/postgres-vs-mongo-performance-comparison-for-semi-structured-data-9a5ec6486cf6

╔═════════════════════════════════════╦═══════════╦═══════════╗
║ Test                                ║ Mongo     ║ Postgres  ║
╠═════════════════════════════════════╬═══════════╬═══════════╣
║ Index creation on an empty database ║ 152.9 ms  ║ 402.0 ms  ║
║ Batch insert                        ║ 53.50 ms  ║ 219.15 ms ║
║ One by one insert                   ║ 319.3 ms  ║ 641.9 ms  ║
║ Read multiple records               ║ 21.83 ms  ║ 66.63 ms  ║
║ Index creation on filled database   ║ 1.563 s   ║ 1.916 s   ║
║ Aggregated query                    ║ 174.51 ms ║ 60.43 ms  ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════╩═══════════╩═══════════╝

## Embedding vs referencing

when to embed documents and when to reference

MongoDB Schema Design: Data Modeling Best Practices

https://www.mongodb.com/developer/products/mongodb/mongodb-schema-design-best-practices/

 it depends. This is because document databases have a rich vocabulary that is capable of expressing data relationships in more nuanced ways than SQL. There are many things to consider when picking a schema. Is your app read or write heavy? What data is frequently accessed together? What are your performance considerations? How will your data set grow and scale?

MongoDB schema design is the most critical part of deploying a scalable, fast, and affordable database

If you design the MongoDB schema like a relational schema yuou lose the benefits and power of NSQL


The tl;dr of normalization is to split up your data into tables, so you don't duplicate data.

1 user
has many cars
has many jobs

In sql : 3 tables, apply Normalization forms etc

With MongoDB schema design, there is:

    No formal process
    No algorithms
    No rules

When you are designing your MongoDB schema design, the only thing that matters is that you design a schema that will work well for your application. Two different apps that use the same exact data might have very different schemas if the applications are used differently. When designing a schema, we want to take into consideration the following:

    Store the data
    Provide good query performance
    Require reasonable amount of hardware

cars and models can be inccluded in the user document


### Referncing vs Embedding

Embedding
Advantages

    You can retrieve all relevant information in a single query.
    Avoid implementing joins in application code or using $lookup.
    Update related information as a single atomic operation. By default, all CRUD operations on a single document are ACID compliant.
    However, if you need a transaction across multiple operations, you can use the transaction operator.
    Though transactions are available starting 4.0, however, I should add that it's an anti-pattern to be overly reliant on using them in your application.

Limitations

    Large documents mean more overhead if most fields are not relevant. You can increase query performance by limiting the size of the documents that you are sending over the wire for each query.
    There is a 16-MB document size limit in MongoDB. If you are embedding too much data inside a single document, you could potentially hit this limit.


Referencing
Okay, so the other option for designing our schema is referencing another document using a document's unique object ID and connecting them together using the $lookup operator. Referencing works similarly as the JOIN operator in an SQL query. It allows us to split up data to make more efficient and scalable queries, yet maintain relationships between data.
Advantages

    By splitting up data, you will have smaller documents.
    Less likely to reach 16-MB-per-document limit.
    Infrequently accessed information not needed on every query.
    Reduce the amount of duplication of data. However, it's important to note that data duplication should not be avoided if it results in a better schema.

Limitations

    In order to retrieve all the data in the referenced documents, a minimum of two queries or $lookup required to retrieve all the information.

### Type iof relationships


#### One-to-One

Let's take a look at our User document. This example has some great one-to-one data in it. For example, in our system, one user can only have one name. So, this would be an example of a one-to-one relationship. We can model all one-to-one data as key-value pairs in our database.

{

    "_id": "ObjectId('AAA')",

    "name": "Joe Karlsson",

    "company": "MongoDB",

    "twitter": "@JoeKarlsson1",

    "twitch": "joe_karlsson",

    "tiktok": "joekarlsson",

    "website": "joekarlsson.com"

}

One to One tl;dr:

    Prefer key-value pair embedded in the document.
    For example, an employee can work in one and only one department.

#### One-to-Few


a small sequence of data that's associated with our users. For example, we might need to store several addresses associated with a given user. It's unlikely that a user for our application would have more than a couple of different addresses. For relationships like this, we would define this as a one-to-few relationship.

Rule 1: Favor embedding unless there is a compelling reason not to.

    Prefer embedding for one-to-few relationships.

#### One-to-Many
Alright, let's say that you are building a product page for an e-commerce website, and you are going to have to design a schema that will be able to show product information. In our system, we save information about all the many parts that make up each product for repair services. How would you design a schema to save all this data, but still make your product page performant? You might want to consider a one-to-many schema since your one product is made up of many parts.


Rule 2: Needing to access an object on its own is a compelling reason not to embed it.

Rule 3: Avoid joins/lookups if possible, but don't be afraid if they can provide a better schema design.

#### One-to-Squillions
What if we have a schema where there could be potentially millions of subdocuments, or more? That's when we get to the one-to-squillions schema.


a server logging application. Each server could potentially save a massive amount of data, depending on how verbose you're logging and how long you store server logs for.


 instead of tracking the relationship between the host and the log message in the host document, let's let each log message store the host that its message is associated with. By storing the data in the log, we no longer need to worry about an unbounded array messing with our application! Let's take a look at how this might work.

Rule 4: Arrays should not grow without bound. If there are more than a couple of hundred documents on the "many" side, don't embed them; if there are more than a few thousand documents on the "many" side, don't use an array of ObjectID references. High-cardinality arrays are a compelling reason not to embed.

#### Many-to-Many
The last schema design pattern we are going to be covering in this post is the many-to-many relationship. This is another very common schema pattern that we see all the time in relational and MongoDB schema designs. For this pattern, let's imagine that we are building a to-do application. In our app, a user may have many tasks and a task may have many users assigned to it.

Users:

{

    "_id": ObjectID("AAF1"),

    "name": "Kate Monster",

    "tasks": [ObjectID("ADF9"), ObjectID("AE02"), ObjectID("AE73")]

}

Tasks:

{

    "_id": ObjectID("ADF9"),

    "description": "Write blog post about MongoDB schema design",

    "due_date": ISODate("2014-04-01"),

    "owners": [ObjectID("AAF1"), ObjectID("BB3G")]

}

From this example, you can see that each user has a sub-array of linked tasks, and each task has a sub-array of owners for each item in our to-do app.

Rule 5: As always, with MongoDB, how you model your data depends – entirely – on your particular application's data access patterns. You want to structure your data to match the ways that your application queries and updates it.


Recap:

    One-to-One - Prefer key value pairs within the document
    One-to-Few - Prefer embedding
    One-to-Many - Prefer embedding
    One-to-Squillions - Prefer Referencing
    Many-to-Many - Prefer Referencing

General Rules for MongoDB Schema Design:

    Rule 1: Favor embedding unless there is a compelling reason not to.
    Rule 2: Needing to access an object on its own is a compelling reason not to embed it.
    Rule 3: Avoid joins and lookups if possible, but don't be afraid if they can provide a better schema design.
    Rule 4: Arrays should not grow without bound. If there are more than a couple of hundred documents on the many side, don't embed them; if there are more than a few thousand documents on the many side, don't use an array of ObjectID references. High-cardinality arrays are a compelling reason not to embed.
    Rule 5: As always, with MongoDB, how you model your data depends entirely on your particular application's data access patterns. You want to structure your data to match the ways that your application queries and updates it.

### Massive arrays anti pattern

https://www.mongodb.com/developer/products/mongodb/schema-design-anti-pattern-massive-arrays/





## Sharding vs replication

> **Sharding** is the process of splitting large datasets across multiple servers (shards) to provide scalability and ensure performance. With sharding, MongoDB can handle large amounts of data and high query loads by distributing the data across a cluster of servers.

see <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/sharding/> and <https://www.mongodb.com/resources/products/capabilities/sharding>

Sharding is useful when:

- The dataset becomes too large for a single database server.
- Query performance degrades due to high read/write loads.
- Scalability is required for handling increased user traffic.

MongoDB has **native sharding capabilities** but sharding is a broad concept applicable to many database systems (often though extensions).

